=head1 Overloading

Z<overloading>
X<overloading>

Perl 5 is not a pervasively object oriented language. Its core data types
(scalars, arrays, and hashes) are not objects with overloadable methods, but
you I<can> control the behavior of your own classes and objects, especially
when they undergo coercion or contextual evaluation. This is I<overloading>.

Overloading can be subtle but powerful.  An interesting example is overloading
how an object behaves in boolean context, especially if you use something like
the Null Object pattern (U<http://www.c2.com/cgi/wiki?NullObject>). In boolean
context, an object will evaluate to a true value, unless you overload
boolification.

You can overload what the object does for almost every operation or coercion:
stringification, numification, boolification, iteration, invocation, array
access, hash access, arithmetic operations, comparison operations, smart match,
bitwise operations, and even assignment. Stringification, numification, and
boolification are the most important and most common.

=head2 Overloading Common Operations

X<overloading; boolean>
X<overloading; numeric>
X<overloading; string>
X<C<overload> pragma>
X<pragmas; C<overload>>

The C<overload> pragma allows you to associate a function with an operation you
can overload by passing argument pairs, where the key names the type of
overload and the value is a function reference to call for that operation. A
C<Null> class which overloads boolean evaluation so that it always evaluates to
a false value might resemble:

=begin programlisting

    package Null
    {
        use overload 'bool' => sub { 0 };

        ...
    }

=end programlisting

It's easy to add a stringification:

=begin programlisting

    package Null
    {
        use overload
            'bool' => sub { 0 },
            B<< '""'   => sub { '(null)' }; >>
    }

=end programlisting

Overriding numification is more complex, because arithmetic operators tend to
be binary ops (L<arity>). Given two operands both with overloaded methods for
addition, which takes precedence? The answer needs to be consistent, easy to
explain, and understandable by people who haven't read the source code of the
implementation.

C<perldoc overload> attempts to explain this in the sections labeled I<Calling
Conventions for Binary Operations> and I<MAGIC AUTOGENERATION>, but the easiest
solution is to overload numification (keyed by C<'0+'>) and tell C<overload> to
use the provided overloads as fallbacks where possible:

=begin programlisting

    package Null
    {
        use overload
            'bool'   => sub { 0 },
            '""'     => sub { '(null)' },
            B<< '0+'     => sub { 0 }, >>
            B<< fallback => 1; >>
    }

=end programlisting

Setting C<fallback> to a true value lets Perl use any other defined overloads
to compose the requested operation when possible.  If that's not possible, Perl
will act as if there were no overloads in effect.  This is often what you want.

Without C<fallback>, Perl will only use the specific overloadings you have
provided.  If someone tries to perform an operation you have not overloaded,
Perl will throw an exception.

=head2 Overload and Inheritance

X<overloading; inheritance>

Subclasses inherit overloadings from their ancestors.  They may override this
behavior in one of two ways.  If the parent class uses overloading as shown,
with function references provided directly, a child class I<must> override the
parent's overloaded behavior by using C<overload> directly.

Parent classes can allow their descendants more flexibility by specifying the
I<name> of a method to call to implement the overloading, rather than
hard-coding a function reference:

=begin programlisting

    package Null
    {
        use overload
            'bool'   => 'get_bool',
            '""'     => 'get_string',
            '0+'     => 'get_num',
            fallback => 1;
    }

=end programlisting

In this case, any child classes can perform these overloaded operations
differently by overriding the appropriate named methods.

=head2 Uses of Overloading

X<CPAN; C<IO::All>>

Overloading may seem like a tempting tool to use to produce symbolic shortcuts
for new operations, but it's rare in Perl 5 for a good reason. The C<IO::All>
CPAN distribution pushes this idea to its limit to produce clever ideas for
concise and composable code.  Yet for every brilliant API refined through the
appropriate use of overloading, a dozen more messes congeal.  Sometimes the
best code eschews cleverness in favor of simplicity.

Overriding addition, multiplication, and even concatenation on a C<Matrix>
class makes sense, only because the existing notation for those operations is
pervasive.  A new problem domain without that established notation is a poor
candidate for overloading, as is a problem domain where you have to squint to
make Perl's existing operators match a different notation.

Damian Conway's I<Perl Best Practices> suggests one other use for overloading:
to prevent the accidental abuse of objects.  For example, overloading
numification to C<croak()> for objects which have no reasonable single numeric
representation can help you find and fix real bugs.
