Z<perl_community>

=head1 Community Sites

X<perl.org>
X<websites; perl.org>

Perl's homepage at U<http://www.perl.org/> links to Perl documentation, source
code, tutorials, mailing lists, and several important community projects. If
you're new to Perl, the Perl beginners mailing list is a friendly place to ask
novice questions and get accurate and helpful answers. See
U<http://learn.perl.org/faq/beginners.html>.

The home of Perl development is U<http://dev.perl.org/>, which links to
relevant resources for core development of Perl 5 and Perl 6N<Though
see also U<http://www.perl6.org/>>.

X<perl.com>
X<websites; perl.com>

Perl.com publishes articles and tutorials about Perl and its culture. Its
archives reach back into the 20th century. See U<http://www.perl.com/>.

X<cpan.org>
X<websites; cpan.org>
X<MetaCPAN>
X<websites; MetaCPAN>

The CPAN's (L<cpan>) central location is U<http://www.cpan.org/>, though
experienced users spend more time on U<http://search.cpan.org/>. This central
software distribution hub of reusable, free Perl code is an essential part of
the Perl community. MetaCPAN (U<https://metacpan.org/>) is a recent alternative
front end to the CPAN.

X<PerlMonks>
X<websites; PerlMonks>

PerlMonks, at U<http://perlmonks.org/>, is a community site devoted to
discussions about Perl programming. Its eleven year history makes it one of the
most venerable question and answer sites for any programming language.

X<blogs.perl.org>
X<websites; blogs.perl.org>

Several community sites offer news and commentary. U<http://blogs.perl.org/> is
a free blog platform open to any Perl community member.

X<Enlightened Perl Organization>
X<Planet Perl>
X<Planet Perl Iron Man>
X<websites; Planet Perl>
X<websites; Planet Perl Iron Man>

Other sites aggregate the musings of Perl hackers, including
U<http://perlsphere.net/>, U<http://planet.perl.org/>, and
U<http://ironman.enlightenedperl.org/>. The latter is part of an initiative
from the Enlightened Perl Organization (U<http://enlightenedperl.org/>) to
increase the amount and improve the quality of Perl publishing on the web.

X<Perl Buzz>
X<websites; Perl Buzz>
X<Perl Weekly>
X<websites; Perl Weekly>

Perl Buzz (U<http://perlbuzz.com/>) collects and republishes some of the most
interesting and useful Perl news on a regular basis. Perl Weekly
(U<http://perlweekly.com/>) offers a weekly take on news from the Perl world.

=head1 Development Sites

X<RT>
X<Best Practical>

Best Practical Solutions (U<http://bestpractical.com/>) maintains an
installation of their popular request tracking system, RT, for CPAN authors as
well as Perl 5 and Perl 6 development. Every CPAN distribution has its own RT
queue, linked from C<search.cpan.org> and available on U<http://rt.cpan.org/>.
Perl 5 and Perl 6 have separate RT queues available on U<http://rt.perl.org/>.

X<Perl 5 Porters>
X<p5p>

The Perl 5 Porters (or I<p5p>) mailing list is the focal point of the
development of Perl 5 itself. See
U<http://lists.cpan.org/showlist.cgi?name=perl5-porters>.

X<TPF>
X<The Perl Foundation>
X<TPF; wiki>
X<websites; TPF wiki>

The Perl Foundation (U<http://www.perlfoundation.org/>) hosts a wiki for all
things Perl 5. See U<http://www.perlfoundation.org/perl5>.

X<Github>
X<gitpan>
X<websites; gitpan>

Many Perl hackers use Github (U<http://github.com/>) to host their
projectsN<...  including the sources of this book at
U<http://github.com/chromatic/modern_perl_book/>>. See especially Gitpan
(U<http://github.com/gitpan/>), which hosts Git repositories chronicling the
complete history of every distribution on the CPAN.

=begin tip A Local Git Mirror

X<CPAN; C<Git::CPAN::Patch>>
X<Champoux, Yanick>

GitPAN receives infrequent updates. As an alternative, consider using Yanick
Champoux's wonderful C<Git::CPAN::Patch> module.

=end tip

=head1 Events

X<YAPC>

The Perl community holds countless conferences, workshops, seminars, and
meetings. In particular, the community-run YAPC--Yet Another Perl
Conference--is a successful, local, low-cost conference model held on multiple
continents. See U<http://yapc.org/>.

The Perl Foundation wiki lists other events at
U<http://www.perlfoundation.org/perl5/index.cgi?perl_events>.

X<Perl Mongers>

Hundreds of local Perl Mongers groups get together frequently for technical
talks and social interaction. See U<http://www.pm.org/>.

=head1 IRC

X<IRC>
X<IRC; #moose>
X<IRC; #catalyst>
X<IRC; #perl-help>
X<IRC; #perl>

When Perl mongers can't meet in person, many collaborate and chat online
through the textual chat system known as IRC. Many of the most popular and
useful Perl projects have their own IRC channels, such as I<#moose> and
I<#catalyst>.

The main server for Perl community is U<irc://irc.perl.org/>. Notable channels
include I<#perl-help>, for general assistance on Perl programming, and
I<#perl-qa>, devoted to testing and other quality issues. Be aware that the
channel I<#perl> is a general purpose channel for discussing whatever its
participants want to discussN<... and, as such, it's not primarily a
helpdesk.>.
