=head2 The CPAN

Z<cpan>

Perl 5 is a pragmatic language.  It'll help you get your work done.  Yet the
ever-pragmatic Perl community has extended that language and made their work
available to the world.  If you have a problem to solve, chances are someone's
already uploaded code to the CPAN for it.

The line between a modern language and its libraries is fuzzy.  Is a language
only syntax?  Is it the core libraries?  Is it the availability of external
libraries and the ease at which you can use them within your own projects?

X<CPAN>

Regardless of how you answer those questions for any other language, modern
Perl programming makes heavy use of the CPAN (U<http://www.cpan.org/>).  The
CPAN, or Comprehensive Perl Archive Network, is an uploading and mirroring
system for redistributable, reusable Perl code.  It's one of--if not
I<the>--largest archives of libraries of code in the world.

X<distribution>
X<module>

CPAN mirrors I<distributions>, which tend to be collections of reusable Perl
code.  A single distribution can contain one or more I<modules>, or
self-contained libraries of Perl code.  Each distribution lives in its own
namespace on the CPAN and contains its own metadata.  You can build, install,
test, and update each distribution.  Distributions may depend on other
distributions.  For this reason, installing distributions through a CPAN client
is often simpler than doing so manually.

=begin sidebar

The CPAN I<adds> hundreds of registered contributors and thousands of indexed
modules in hundreds of distributions every month.  Those numbers do not take
into account updates.  In late August 2010, search.cpan.org reported 8396
uploaders, 85146 modules, and 20824 distributions.

=end sidebar

X<search.cpan.org>

The CPAN itself is merely a mirroring service.  Authors upload distributions
containing modules, and the CPAN sends them to mirror sites, from which users
and CPAN clients download, configure, build, test, and install distributions.
Yet the CPAN has succeeded because of this simplicity, and because of the
contributions of thousands of volunteers who've built on this distribution
system to produce something greater.  In particular, community standards have
evolved to identify the attributes and characteristics of well-formed CPAN
distributions.  These include:

=over 4

=item Standards for installation to work with automated CPAN installers.

=item Standards for metadata to describe what each distribution includes and
any dependencies of the distribution.

=item Standards for documentation and licensing to describe what the
distribution does and how you may use it.

=back

Additional CPAN services provide comprehensive automated testing and reporting
of every CPAN distribution for adherence to packaging and distribution
guidelines and correctness of behavior on various platforms and versions of
Perl.  Every CPAN distribution has its own ticket queue on
U<http://rt.cpan.org/> for reporting bugs and working with authors.
Distributions also have historical versions available on the CPAN, ratings,
annotations for the documentation, and other useful information.  All of this
is available from U<http://search.cpan.org/>.

X<CPAN.pm>
X<CPANPLUS>

Modern Perl installations include two clients to connect to, search, download,
build, test, and install CPAN distributions, CPAN.pm and CPANPLUS.  They behave
equivalently; their use is a matter of taste.  This book recommends the use of
CPAN.pm solely due to its ubiquity.

If you use a recent version of CPAN.pm (as of this writing, 1.9402 is the
latest stable release), CPAN.pm configuration is largely decision-free.  For
any complete installation of Perl, you may start the client with:

=begin programlisting

    $ B<cpan>

=end programlisting

To install a distribution:

=begin programlisting

    $ B<cpan Modern::Perl>

=end programlisting

X<Eric Wilhelm>
X<CPAN.pm; configuration>
X<CPAN.pm; troubleshooting>

Eric Wilhelm's excellent tutorial on configuring CPAN.pm
(U<http://learnperl.scratchcomputing.com/tutorials/configuration/>) is worth
reading twice, especially its section on troubleshooting.

=begin sidebar

Even though the CPAN client is a core module for the Perl 5 distribution, you
may also have to install standard development tools such as a C<make> utility
and possibly a C compiler to install all of the distributions you want.
Windows users, see Strawberry Perl (U<http://strawberryperl.com/>) and
Strawberry Perl Professional.  Mac OS X users need their developer tools
installed.  Unix and Unix-like users, consult your local system administrator.

=end sidebar

For your work setting up a CPAN client and an environment to build and install
distributions, you get access to libraries for everything from database access
to profiling tools to protocols for almost every network device ever created to
sound and graphics libraries and wrappers for shared libraries on your system.

Modern Perl without the CPAN is just another language.  Modern Perl with the
CPAN is amazing.

=begin sidebar

Serious Perl developers often manage their own Perl library paths or even full
installations.  Several projects help to make this possible.

C<App::cpanminus> is a new CPAN client with goals of speed, simplicity, and
zero configuration.  Installation is as easy as:

=begin programlisting

    $ curl -LO http://xrl.us/cpanm
    $ chmod +x cpanm

=end programlisting

C<App::perlbrew> is a system to manage and to switch between your own
installations of multiple versions and configurations of Perl.  Installation is as easy as:

=begin programlisting

    $ curl -LO http://xrl.us/perlbrew
    $ chmod +x perlbrew
    $ ./perlbrew install
    $ perldoc App::perlbrew

=end programlisting

The C<local::lib> CPAN distribution allows you to install and to manage
distributions in your own user directory, rather than for the system as a
whole.  This is an effective way to maintain CPAN distributions without
affecting other users.  Installation is somewhat more involved than the
previous two distributions.  See U<http://search.cpan.org/perldoc?local::lib>
for more details.

All three distributions projects tend to assume a Unix-like environment (such
as a GNU/Linux distribution or even Mac OS X). Windows users, see the Padre
all-in-one download (U<http://padre.perlide.org/download.html>).

=end sidebar
