=head1 Distributions

Z<distributions>

X<distribution>

A I<distribution> is a collection of one or more modules (L<modules>) which
forms a single redistributable, testable, and installable unit.  Effectively
it's a collection of module and metadata.

The easiest way to manage software configuration, building, distribution,
testing, and installation even within your organization is to create
distributions compatible with the CPAN.  The conventions of the CPAN--how to
package a distribution, how to resolve its dependencies, where to install
software, how to verify that it works, how to display documentation, how to
manage a repository--have all arisen from the rough consensus of thousands of
contributors working on tens of thousands of projects.

In particular, the copious amount of testing and reporting and dependency
checking achieved by CPAN developers exceeds the available information and
quality of work in any other language community.  A distribution built to CPAN
standards can be tested on several versions of Perl 5 on several different
hardware platforms within a few hours of its uploading--all without human
intervention.

You may choose never to release any of your code as public CPAN distributions,
but you can reuse existing CPAN tools and designs as possible.  The combination
of intelligent defaults and customizability are likely to meet your specific
needs.

=head2 Attributes of a Distribution

A distribution obviously includes one or more modules.  It also includes
several other files and directories:

=over 4

=item * F<Build.PL> or F<Makefile.PL>, the program used to configure, build,
test, bundle, and install the distribution.

=item * F<MANIFEST>, a list of all files contained in the distribution.  This
helps packaging tools produce an entire tarball and helps to verify that
recipients of the tarball have all of the necessary files.

=item * F<META.yml> and/or F<META.json>, a file containing metadata about the distribution and its
dependencies.

=item * F<README>, a description of the distribution, its intent, and its
copyright and licensing information.

=item * F<lib/>, the directory containing Perl modules.

=item * F<t/>, a directory containing test files.

=item * F<Changes>, a log of every change to the distribution.

=back

X<kwalitee>
X<CPANTS>

Additionally, a well-formed distribution must contain a unique name and single
version number (often taken from its primary module).  Any well-formed
distribution you download from the public CPAN should conform to these
standards.  (The CPANTS service evaluates the kwaliteeN<Quality is difficult to
measure with heuristics.  Kwalitee is the automatable relative of quality.> of
all CPAN distributions and recommends improvements to make them easier to
install and to manage.)

=head2 CPAN Tools for Managing Distributions

The Perl 5 core includes several tools to manage distributions--not just
installing them from the CPAN, but developing and managing your own:

=over 4

=item * C<CPAN.pm> is the official CPAN client.  While by default it installs
distributions from the public CPAN, you can point it to your own repository
instead of or in addition to the public repository.

=item * C<CPANPLUS> is an alternate CPAN client with a different design
approach.  It does some things better than C<CPAN.pm>, but they are largely
equivalent at this point.  Use whichever you prefer.

=item * C<Module::Build> is a pure-Perl tool suite for configuring, building,
installing, and testing distributions.  It works with the F<Build.PL> file
mentioned earlier.

=item * C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> is an older, legacy tool which C<Module::Build>
intends to replace.  It is still in wide use, though it is in maintenance mode
and receives only the most critical bugfixes.  It works with the F<Makefile.PL>
file mentioned earlier.

=item * C<Test::More> (L<testing>) is the basic and most widely used testing
module used to write automated tests for Perl software.

=item * C<Test::Harness> and C<prove> (L<running_tests>) are the tools used to
run tests and to interpret and report their results.

=back

In addition, several non-core CPAN modules make your life easier as a
developer:

=over 4

=item * C<App::cpanminus> is a new utility which provides almost
configuration-free use of the public CPAN.  It fulfills 90% of your needs to
find and install modules.

=item * C<CPAN::Mini> and the C<cpanmini> command allow you to create your own
(private) mirror of the public CPAN.  You can inject your own distributions
into this repository and manage which versions of the public modules are
available in your organization.

=item * C<Dist::Zilla> is a toolkit for managing distributions by automating
away common tasks.  It can replace the use of C<Module::Build> or
C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> in many cases.

=item * C<Test::Reporter> allows you to report the results of running the
automated test suites of distributions you install, giving their authors more
data on any failures.

=back

=head2 Designing Distributions

The process of designing a distribution could fill a book (see Sam Tregar's
I<Writing Perl Modules for CPAN>), but a few design principles will help you.
Start with a utility such as C<Module::Starter> or C<Dist::Zilla> from the
CPAN.  The initial cost of learning the configuration and rules may seem like a
steep investment, but the benefit of having everything set up the right way
(and in the case of C<Dist::Zilla>, I<never> going out of date) relieves you of
much tedious bookkeeping.

Then consider several rules.

=over 4

=item * I<Each distribution should have a single, well-defined purpose.>  That
purpose may be to process a particular type of data file or to gather together
several related distributions into a single installable bundle.  Decomposing
your software into individual bundles allows you to manage their dependencies
appropriately and to respect their encapsulation.

=item * I<Each distribution needs a single version number.>  Version numbers
must always increase.  The semantic version policy (U<http://semver.org/>) is
sane and compatible with the Perl 5 approach.

=item * I<Each distribution should have a well-defined API.>  A comprehensive
automated test suite can verify that you maintain this API across versions.  If
you use a local CPAN mirror to install your own distributions, you can re-use
the CPAN infrastructure for testing distributions and their dependencies.  You
get easy access to integration testing across reusable components.

=item * I<Automate your distribution tests and make them repeatable and
valuable.>  Managing software effectively requires you to know when it works
and how it fails if it fails.

=item * I<Present an effective and simple interface.>  Avoid the use of global
symbols and default exports; allow people to use only what they need and do not
pollute their namespaces.

=back

=begin sidebar

X<CPAN::Mini>
X<cpanmini>

The C<CPAN::Mini> distribution from the CPAN allows you to create your own
local mirror of the CPAN into which you can inject your own distributions.

=end sidebar
