=head1 Expressivity

Z<expressivity>

X<Wall, Larry>
X<Larry Wall>

Before Larry Wall created Perl, he studied linguistics and human languages.
His experiences continue to influence Perl's design.  There are many ways to
write a Perl program depending on your project's style, the available time to
create the program, the expected maintenance burden, or even your own personal
sense of expression.  You may write in a straightforward, top-to-bottom style.
You may write many small and independent functions.  You may model your problem
with classes and objects.  You may eschew or embrace advanced features.

X<TIMTOWTDI>
X<Tim Toady>

Perl hackers have a slogan for this: I<TIMTOWTDI>, pronounced "Tim Toady", or
"There's more than one way to do it!"

Where this expressivity can provide a large palette with which master craftsman
can create amazing and powerful edifices, unwise conglomerations of various
techniques can impede maintainability and comprehensibility.  You can write
good code or you can make a mess.  The choice is yoursN<... but be kind to
other people, if you must make a mess.>.

Where other languages might suggest that one enforced way to perform any
operation is the right solution, Perl allows you to optimize for your most
important criteria.  Within the realm of your own problems, you can choose from
several good approaches--but be mindful of readability and future
maintainability.

As a novice to Perl, you may find certain constructs difficult to understand.
The greater Perl community has discovered and promoted several idioms
(L<idioms>) which offer great power.  Don't expect to understand them
immediately.  Some of Perl's features interact in subtle ways.

=begin sidebar

Learning Perl is like learning a second or third spoken language.  You'll learn
a few words, then string together some sentences, and eventually will be able
to have small, simple conversations.  Mastery comes with practice, both reading
and writing.  You don't have to understand all of the details of this chapter
immediately to be productive with Perl.  Keep these principles in mind as you
read the rest of this book.

=end sidebar

Another design goal of Perl is to surprise experienced (Perl) programmers very
little.  For example, adding two scalars together with a numeric operator
(C<$first_num + $second_num>) is obviously a numeric operation; the operator
must treat both scalars as numeric values to produce a numeric result.  No
matter what the contents of C<$first_num> and C<$second_num>, Perl will coerce
them to numeric values (L<numeric_coercion>) without requiring the user or
programmer to perform this conversion manually.  You've expressed your intent
to treat them as numbers by choosing a numeric operator (L<numeric_operators>),
so Perl happily handles the rest.

X<DWIM>
X<principle of least astonishment>

In general, Perl programmers can expect Perl to do what you mean; this is the
notion of I<DWIM>--I<do what I mean>.  You may also see this mentioned as the
I<principle of least astonishment>.  Given a cursory understanding of Perl
(especially its L<context_philosophy>), it should be possible to read a single
unfamiliar Perl expression and understand its intent.

X<baby Perl>

If you're new to Perl, you will develop this skill over time.  The flip side of
Perl's expressivity is that Perl novices can write useful programs before they
learn all of Perl's powerful features.  The Perl community often refers to this
as I<baby Perl>.  Though it may sound dismissive, please don't take offense;
everyone is a novice once.  Take the opportunity to learn from more experienced
programmers and ask for explanations of idioms and constructs you don't yet
understand.

=begin sidebar

A Perl novice might multiply a list of numbers by three by writing:

=begin programlisting

    my @tripled;
    my $count = @numbers;

    for (my $i = 0; $i < $count; $i++)
    {
        $tripled[$i] = $numbers[$i] * 3;
    }

=end programlisting

A Perl adept might write:

=begin programlisting

    my @tripled;

    for my $num (@numbers)
    {
        push @tripled, $num * 3;
    }

=end programlisting

An experienced Perl hacker might write:

=begin programlisting

    my @tripled = map { $_ * 3 } @numbers;

=end programlisting

Experience writing Perl will help you to focus on what you want to do rather
than how to do it.

=end sidebar

Perl is a language intended to grow with your understanding of programming.  It
won't punish you for writing simple programs.  It allows you to refine and
expand programs for clarity, expressivity, reuse, and maintainability.  Take
advantage of this philosophy.  It's more important to accomplish your task well
than to write a conceptually pure and beautiful program.

The rest of this book demonstrates how to use Perl to your advantage.
