=head1 Handling Warnings

Z<handling_warnings>

Perl 5 produces optional warnings for many confusing, unclear, and ambiguous
situations.  Even though you should almost always enable warnings
unconditionally, certain circumstances dictate prudence in disabling certain
warnings--and Perl supports this.

=head2 Producing Warnings

Z<producing_warnings>

X<keywords; warn>
X<warn>

Use the C<warn> keyword to emit a warning:

=begin programlisting

    warn 'Something went wrong!';

=end programlisting

C<warn> prints a list of values to the STDERR filehandle (L<filehandle>).  Perl
will append the filename and line number on which the C<warn> call occurred
unless the last element of the list ends in a newline.

X<Carp>
X<Carp; carp()>
X<Carp; cluck()>
X<Carp; croak()>
X<Carp; confess()>

The core C<Carp> module offers other mechanisms to produce warnings.  Its
C<carp()> function reports a warning from the perspective of the calling code.
That is, you could check the arity of a function (L<arity>) with:

=begin programlisting

    use Carp;

    sub only_two_arguments
    {
        my ($lop, $rop) = @_;
        Carp::carp( 'Too many arguments provided' ) if @_ > 2;
        ...
    }

=end programlisting

... and anyone who reads the error message will receive the filename and line
number of the I<calling> code, not C<only_two_arguments()>.  Similarly,
C<Carp>'s C<cluck()> produces an entire backtrace of all function points up to
its call.

X<Carp; verbose>

To track down weird warnings or exceptions throughout your system, enable
C<Carp>'s verbose mode throughout the entire program:

=begin programlisting

    $ perl -MCarp=verbose my_prog.pl

=end programlisting

This changes all C<croak()> calls to produce C<confess()>'s behavior and all
C<carp()> calls to C<cluck()>'s behavior.

=head2 Enabling and Disabling Warnings

X<-w>
X<command-line arguments; -w>

Lexical encapsulation of warnings is as important as lexical encapsulation of
variables.  Older code may use the C<-w> command-line argument to enable
warnings throughout the program, even if other code has not specifically
attempted to suppress warnings.  It's all or nothing.  If you have the
wherewithal to eliminate warnings and potential warnings throughout the entire
codebase, this can be useful.

X<warnings>
X<pragmas; warnings>

The modern approach is to use the C<warnings> pragma.  The presence of C<use
warnings;> or an equivalentN<Such as C<use Modern::Perl;>> in code indicates
that the authors intended that normal operation of the code should not produce
warnings.

=begin sidebar

X<-W>
X<command-line arguments; -W>
X<-X>
X<command-line arguments; -X>

The C<-W> flag enables warnings throughout the program unilaterally, regardless
of lexical enabling or disabling through the C<warnings> pragma.  The C<-X>
flag I<disables> warnings throughout the program unilaterally.  Neither is
common.

=end sidebar

X<$^W>
X<global variables; $^W>

All of C<-w>, C<-W>, and C<-X> affect the value of the global variable C<$^W>.
Code written before the C<warnings> pragma (Perl 5.6.0 in spring 2000) may
C<local>ize C<$^W> to suppress certain warnings within a given scope.  New code
should use the pragma instead.

=head2 Disabling Warning Categories

To disable selective warnings within a scope, use C<no warnings;> with an
argument list.  Omitting the argument list disables all warnings within that
scope.

C<perldoc perllexwarn> lists all of the warnings categories your version of
Perl 5 understands with the C<warnings> pragma.  Most of them represent truly
interesting conditions in which Perl may find your program.  A few may be
unhelpful in specific conditions.  For example, the C<recursion> warning will
occur if Perl detects that a function has called itself more than a hundred
times.  If you are confident in your ability to write recursion-ending
conditions, you may disable this warning within the scope of the recursion.
(Alternately see L<tail_calls>.)

If you're generating code (L<code_generation>) or locally redefining symbols,
you may wish to disable the C<redefine> warnings.

Some experienced Perl hackers disable the C<uninitialized> value warnings in
string-processing code which concatenates values from many sources.  Careful
initialization of variables can avoid the need to disable the warning, but
local style and concision may render this warning moot.

=head2 Making Warnings Fatal

Z<fatal_warnings>
X<warnings; fatal>

If your project considers warnings as onerous as errors, you can make them
lexically fatal.  To promote I<all> warnings into exceptions:

=begin programlisting

    use warnings FATAL => 'all';

=end programlisting

You may also make specific categories of warnings fatal, such as the use of
deprecated constructs:

=begin programlisting

    use warnings FATAL => 'deprecated';

=end programlisting

=head2 Catching Warnings

X<signal handlers; __WARN__>
X<__WARN__>
X<$SIG{__WARN__}>
X<warnings; catching>

Just as you can catch exceptions, so you can catch warnings.  The C<%SIG>
variable holds handlers for all sorts of signals Perl or your operating system
might throw.  It also includes two slots for signal handlers for Perl 5
exceptions and warnings.  To catch a warning, install an anonymous function
into C<$SIG{__WARN__}>:

=begin programlisting

    {
        my $warning;
        local $SIG{__WARN__} = sub { $warning .= shift };

        # do something risky
        say "Caught warning:\n$warning" if $warning;
    }

=end programlisting

Within the warning handler, the first argument is the warning's message.
Admittedly, this technique is less useful than disabling warnings
lexically--but it can come to good use in test modules such as
C<Test::Warnings> from the CPAN, where the actual text of the warning is
important.

=begin sidebar

C<perldoc perlvar> discusses C<%SIG> in more detail.

=end sidebar

=head2 Registering Your Own Warnings

Z<registering_warnings>

X<warnings; registering>
X<lexical warnings>

With the use of the C<warnings::register> pragma you can even create your own
lexical warnings so that users of your code can enable and disable lexical
warnings as appropriate.  This is easy to accomplish; from a module, C<use> the
C<warnings::register> pragma:

=begin programlisting

    package Scary::Monkey;

    B<use warnings::register;>

    1;

=end programlisting

This will create a new warnings category named after the package (in this case,
C<Scary::Monkey>).  Users can enable it explicitly with C<use warnings
'Scary::Monkey'> or disable it explicitly with C<no warnings 'Scary::Monkey'>.
To report a warning, use the C<warnings::warn()> function in conjunction with
C<warnings::enabled()>:

=begin programlisting

    package Scary::Monkey;

    use warnings::register;

    B<sub import>
    B<{>
        B<warnings::warn( __PACKAGE__ . ' used with empty import list' )>
            B<if @_ == 0 && warnings::enabled();>
    B<}>

    1;

=end programlisting

If C<warnings::enabled()> is true, then the calling lexical scope has this
warning enabled.  You can also report warnings for an existing warnings
category, such as the use of deprecated constructs:

=begin programlisting

    package Scary::Monkey;

    use warnings::register;

    B<sub import>
    B<{>
        B<warnings::warnif( 'deprecated',
            'empty imports from ' . __PACKAGE__ . ' are now deprecated' )
            unless @_;>
    B<}>

    1;

=end programlisting

The C<warnings::warnif()> function checks the named warnings category and
reports the error if it's active.

See C<perldoc perllexwarn> for more details.
