=head1 Indirect Objects

Z<indirect_objects>

A constructor in Perl 5 is anything which returns an object; C<new> is not a
built-in function.  By convention, constructors are class methods named
C<new()>, but you have the flexibility to choose a different approach to meet
your needs.  Several old Perl 5 object tutorials promote the use of C++ and
Java-style constructor calls:

=begin programlisting

    my $q = B<new> CGI; # DO NOT USE

=end programlisting

... instead of the unambiguous:

=begin programlisting

    my $q = CGI->new();

=end programlisting

These syntaxes are equivalent in behavior, except when they're not.

X<indirect object notation>
X<indirect objects>
X<dative notation>
X<dative>

The first form is the indirect object form (more precisely, the I<dative>
case), where the verb (the method) precedes the noun to which it refers (the
object).  This is fine in spoken languages, but it introduces parsing
ambiguities in Perl 5.

=head2 Bareword Indirect Invocations

One problem is that the name of the method is a bareword (L<barewords>).  The
parser must perform several heuristics to determine the proper interpretation.
While these heuristics are well-tested and I<almost> always correct, their
failure modes are confusing.  Worse, they're fragile in the face of the
I<order> of compilation and module loading.

Parsing is more difficult for humans I<and> the computer when the constructor
takes arguments.  The indirect style may resemble:

=begin programlisting

    # DO NOT USE
    my $obj = new Class( arg => $value );

=end programlisting

... thus making the classname C<Class> look like a function call.  Perl 5
I<can> disambiguate many of these cases, but its heuristics depend on which
package names the parser has seen at the current point in the parse, which
barewords it has already resolved (and how it resolved them), and the I<names>
of functions already declared in the current package.

Imagine running afoul of a function with (prototypes) L<prototypes> with a
name which just happens to conflict somehow with the name of a class or a
method called indirectly.  This is infrequent, but so difficult to debug that
avoiding this syntax is always worthwhile.

=head2 Indirect Notation Scalar Limitations

Another danger of the syntax is that the parser expects a single scalar
expression as the object.  Printing to a filehandle stored in an aggregate
variable I<seems> obvious, but it is not:

=begin programlisting

    # DOES NOT WORK AS WRITTEN
    say $config->{output} "This is a diagnostic message!";

=end programlisting

C<print>, C<close>, and C<say>--all keywords which operate on
filehandles--operate in an indirect fashion.  This was fine when filehandles
were package globals, but lexical filehandles (L<lexical_filehandles>) make the
indirect object syntax problems obvious.  In the previous example, Perl will
try to call the C<say> method on the C<$config> object.  The solution is to
disambiguate the expression which produces the intended invocant:

=begin programlisting

    say B<{>$config->{output}B<}> "This is a diagnostic message!";

=end programlisting

=head2 Alternatives to Indirect Notation

Direct invocation notation does not suffer this ambiguity problem.  To
construct an object, call the constructor method on the class name directly:

=begin programlisting

    my $q   = CGI->new();
    my $obj = Class->new( arg => $value );

=end programlisting

X<IO::Handle>

For the limited case of filehandle operations, the dative use is so prevalent
that you can use the indirect invocation approach if you surround your intended
invocant with curly brackets.  Alternately, consider loading the core
C<IO::Handle> module which allows you to perform IO operations by calling
methods on filehandle objects (such as lexical filehandles).

=begin sidebar

For supreme paranoia, you may disambiguate class method calls further by
appending C<::> to the end of class names, such as C<< CGI::->new() >>.  Very
little code does this in practice, however.

=end sidebar

X<Perl::Critic::Policy::Dynamic::NoIndirect; CPAN modules>
X<Perl::Critic::Policy::Dynamic::NoIndirect>
X<Perl::Critic; CPAN modules>
X<Perl::Critic>
X<indirect; CPAN modules>
X<indirect>

The CPAN module C<Perl::Critic::Policy::Dynamic::NoIndirect> (a plugin for
C<Perl::Critic>) can identify indirect invocations during code reviews.  The
CPAN module C<indirect> can identify and prohibit their use in running
programs:

=begin programlisting

    # warn on indirect use
    no indirect;

    # throw exceptions on their use
    no indirect ':fatal';

=end programlisting
