=head1 Overloading

Z<overloading>
X<overloading>

Perl 5 is not a pervasively object oriented language. Its core data types
(scalars, arrays, and hashes) are not objects with methods you can overload.
Even so, you I<can> control the behavior of your own classes and objects,
especially when they undergo coercion or evaluation in various contexts.  This
is I<overloading>.

Overloading can be subtle but powerful.  An interesting example is overloading
how an object behaves in boolean context, especially if you use something like
the Null Object pattern (U<http://www.c2.com/cgi/wiki?NullObject>).  In boolean
context, an object will be true... but not if you overload boolification.

You can overload what the object does for almost every operation:
stringification, numification, boolification,
iteration, invocation, array access, hash
access, arithmetic operations, comparison operations, smart match, bitwise
operations, and even assignment.

=head2 Overloading Common Operations

X<overloading; boolean>
X<overloading; numeric>
X<overloading; string>
X<overload>
X<pragmas; overload>

The most useful are often the most common: stringification, numification, and
boolification.  The C<overload> pragma allows you to associate a function with
an overloadable operation.  Here's a class which overloads boolean evaluation:

=begin programlisting

    package Null;

    use overload 'bool' => sub { 0 };

=end programlisting

In all boolean contexts, every instance of this class will evaluate to false.

The arguments to the C<overload> pragma are pairs where the key describes the
type of overload and the value is a function reference to call in place of
Perl's default behavior for that object.

It's easy to add a stringification:

=begin programlisting

    package Null;

    use overload
        'bool' => sub { 0 },
        B<< '""'   => sub { '(null)' }; >>

=end programlisting

Overriding numification is more complex, because arithmetic operators tend to
be binary ops (L<arity>).  Given two operands both with overloaded methods for
addition, which takes precedence?  The answer needs to be consistent, easy to
explain, and understandable by people who haven't read the source code of the
implementation.

C<perldoc overload> attempts to explain this in the sections labeled I<Calling
Conventions for Binary Operations> and I<MAGIC AUTOGENERATION>, but the easiest
solution is to overload numification and tell C<overload> to use the provided
overloads as fallbacks where possible:

=begin programlisting

    package Null;

    use overload
        'bool'   => sub { 0 },
        '""'     => sub { '(null)' },
        B<< '0+'     => sub { 0 }, >>
        B<< fallback => 1; >>

=end programlisting

Setting C<fallback> to a true value lets Perl use any other defined overloads
to compose the requested operation, if possible.  If that's not possible, Perl
will act as if there were no overloads in effect.  This is often what you want.

Without C<fallback>, Perl will only use the specific overloadings you have
provided.  If someone tries to perform an operation you have not overloaded,
Perl will throw an exception.

=head2 Overload and Inheritance

X<overloading; inheritance>

Subclasses inherit overloadings from their ancestors.  They may override this
behavior in one of two ways.  If the parent class uses overloading as shown,
with function references provided directly, a child class I<must> override the
parent's overloaded behavior by using C<overload> directly.

Parent classes can allow their descendents more flexibility by specifying the
I<name> of a method to call to perform the overloading, rather than hard-coding
a function reference:

=begin programlisting

    package Null;

    use overload
        'bool'   => 'get_bool',
        '""'     => 'get_string',
        '0+'     => 'get_num',
        fallback => 1;

=end programlisting

Child classes can override only the specified methods without having to use
C<overload> directly themselves.

=begin sidebar

The use of method names produces more flexible code, but developers use code
references much more often.  In this case, use whatever your developer team
decides as a code standard.

=end sidebar

=head2 Uses of Overloading

Overloading may seem like a tempting tool to use to produce symbolic shortcuts
for new operations.  The C<IO::All> CPAN distribution pushes this idea to its
limit to produce clever ideas for concise and composable code.  Yet for every
brilliant API refined through the appropriate use of overloading, a dozen more
messes congeal.  Sometimes the best code eschews cleverness in favor of simple
and straightforward design.

Overriding addition, multiplication, and even concatenation on a C<Matrix>
class makes sense, only because the existing notation for those operations is
pervasive.  A new problem domain without that established notation is a poor
candidate for overloading, as is a problem domain where you have to squint to
make Perl's existing operators match a different notation.

Damian Conway's I<Perl Best Practices> suggests that the other useful use of
overloading is to prevent the accidental abuse of objects.  For example,
overloading numification to C<croak()> for objects which have no reasonable
single numeric representation can help you find real bugs in real programs.
Overloading in Perl 5 is relatively rare, but this suggestion can improve the
reliability and safety of programs.
