Z<perl_community>

=head1 Community Sites

X<perl.org>
X<websites; perl.org>

Perl's homepage is U<http://www.perl.org/>.  This site hosts documentation,
source code, tutorials, mailing lists, and several important community
projects.  If you're new to Perl, the Perl beginners mailing list is a friendly
place to ask novice questions and get accurate and helpful answers.  See
U<http://beginners.perl.org/>.

An important subdomain of note is U<http://dev.perl.org/>, a central site for
core development of Perl 5, Perl 6N<The main Perl 6 site is
U<http://www.perl6.org/>>, and even Perl 1.

X<Perl Pub>

Perl.com publishes several articles and tutorials about Perl programming every
month.  Its archives reach back into the 20th century.  See
U<http://www.perl.com/>.

X<cpan.org>
X<websites; cpan.org>

The CPAN's (L<cpan>) central location is U<http://www.cpan.org/>, though
experienced users spend more time on U<http://search.cpan.org/>.  This central
software distribution hub of reusable, free Perl code is an essential part of
the Perl community.

X<PerlMonks>

PerlMonks, at U<http://perlmonks.org/>, is a venerable community site devoted
to questions and answers and other discussions about Perl programming.  It
celebrated its tenth anniversary in December 2009, making it one of the longest
lasting web communities dedicated to any programming language.

X<use Perl;>
X<blogs.perl.org>

Several community sites offer news and commentary.  The oldest is
U<http://use.perl.org/>; it has offered custom journals for many years.
Several well-known Perl hackers write there.  U<http://blogs.perl.org/> is a
newer community site dedicated to blogging about Perl.

X<Enlightened Perl Organization>

Other sites aggregate the Perl-related musings of Perl hackers, including
U<http://perlsphere.net/>, U<http://planet.perl.org/>, and
U<http://ironman.enlightenedperl.org/>.  The latter is part of an initiative
from the Enlightened Perl Organization (U<http://enlightenedperl.org/>) to
increase the amount of and improve the quality of Perl publishing on the web.

X<Perl Buzz>

Perl Buzz (U<http://perlbuzz.com/>) collects and republishes some of the most
interesting and useful Perl news on a regular basis.

=head1 Development Sites

X<RT>
X<Best Practical>

Best Practical Solutions (U<http://bestpractical.com/>) maintains an
installation of their popular request tracking system, RT, for CPAN authors as
well as Perl 5 and Perl 6 development.  Every CPAN distribution has its own RT
queue, linked from C<search.cpan.org> and available on U<http://rt.cpan.org/>.
Perl 5 and Perl 6 have separate RT queues available on U<http://rt.perl.org/>.

X<Perl 5 Porters>
X<p5p>

The Perl 5 Porters (also known as I<p5p>) mailing list is the central point for
Perl 5 development discussion.  See
U<http://lists.cpan.org/showlist.cgi?name=perl5-porters>.

X<TPF>
X<The Perl Foundation>
X<TPF wiki>

The Perl Foundation (U<http://www.perlfoundation.org/>) hosts a wiki for all
things Perl 5.  See U<http://www.perlfoundation.org/perl5>.

X<Github>
X<Gitpan>

Many Perl hackers use Github (U<http://github.com/>) to host their
projectsN<...  including the drafts of this book at
U<http://github.com/chromatic/modern_perl_book/>)>.  One particularly notable
page on Github is Gitpan, which hosts Git repositories chronicling the complete
history of every distribution on the CPAN.  See U<http://github.com/gitpan/>.

=head1 Events

X<YAPC>

There are plenty of events in the physical world as well.  The Perl community
holds a lot of conferences, workshops, and seminars.  In particular, the
community-run YAPC--Yet Another Perl Conference--is a successful, local,
low-cost conference model held on multiple continents.  See
U<http://yapc.org/>.

The Perl Foundation wiki lists other events at
U<http://www.perlfoundation.org/perl5/index.cgi?perl_events>.

X<Perl Mongers>

There are also hundreds of local Perl Mongers groups which get together
frequently for technical talks and social interaction.  See
U<http://www.pm.org/>.

=head1 IRC

X<IRC>
X<IRC; #moose>
X<IRC; #catalyst>
X<IRC; #perl-help>
X<IRC; #perl>

When Perl mongers aren't at local meetups or conferences or workshops, many
collaborate and chat online through IRC, a textual group chat system from the
early days of the Internet.  Many of the most popular and useful Perl projects
have their own IRC channels, such as I<#moose> or I<#catalyst>.

The main server for Perl community is U<irc://irc.perl.org/>.  Other notable
channels include I<#perl-help>, for general assistance on Perl programming, and
I<#perl-qa>, devoted to testing and other quality issues.  Be aware that the
channel I<#perl> is I<not> for general help--instead, it's a general purpose
room for discussing whatever its participants want to discussN<... and it's not
often friendly to people who ask basic programming questions.>.
