=head3 References

Z<references>

Perl usually does what you expect, even if what you expect is subtle.  Consider
what happens when you pass values to functions:

=begin programlisting

    sub reverse_greeting
    {
        my $name = reverse shift;
        return "Hello, $name!";
    }

    my $name = 'Chuck';
    say reverse_greeting( $name );
    say $name;

=end programlisting

You probably expect that, outside of the function, C<$name> contains C<Chuck>,
even though the value passed into the function gets reversed into C<kcuhC>--and
you're right.  That's exactly what happens.  The contents of the string get
duplicated into two separate scalars.  Modifying one has no effect on the
other.

This is incredibly useful in many cases.  If you had to make explicit copies of
every value before you did anything to them which could possibly cause changes,
you'd go crazy writing lots of extra code.

Of course, it's useful to be able to modify a value in place sometimes as well.
If you have a hash full of data that you want to pass to a function to update
or to delete a key/value pair, creating and returning a new hash for each
change could be troublesome (to say nothing of inefficient).

X<reference>

Perl 5 provides a mechanism by which you can refer to a value without making a
copy of that value.  Any changes made to that I<reference> will update the
value in place, such that I<all> references to that value will see the new
value.

=head4 Scalar References

X<references; operator>
X<operators; reference>
X<operators; \>
X<reference operator>

X<references; scalar>
X<scalar references>

The reference operator is the backslash (C<\>).  In scalar context, it creates
a scalar which is a reference.  In list context, it creates a list of
references.  Thus you can take a reference to C<$name> from the previous
example:

=begin programlisting

    my $name     = 'Larry';
    my $name_ref = B<\>$name;

=end programlisting

A reference is a first-class, built-in scalar data type in Perl 5.  It's not a
string, an array, or a hash.  It's a scalar which refers to another first-class
data type.

X<dereference>
X<dereferencing>
X<references; dereferencing>

To access the value to which a reference refers, you must I<dereference> the
reference.  Dereferencing requires you to add an extra sigil for each level of
dereferencing.  For complex references, you may require a curly-brace block to
disambiguate portions of the expression.  For simple references, you do not:

=begin programlisting

    sub reverse_in_place
    {
        my $name_ref = shift;
        reverse B<$$name>;
    }

    my $name = 'Blabby';
    reverse_in_place( B<\>$name );
    say $name;

=end programlisting

The double scalar sigil dereferences a scalar reference.

=begin sidebar

This example isn't useful in the obvious case; why not have the function return
the modified value directly?  Yet scalar references are especially useful when
processing I<large> scalars; copying the contents of those scalars can use a
lot of time and memory.

=end sidebar

The brace form also works, though it's relatively messy in comparison:

=begin programlisting

    sub reverse_in_place
    {
        my $name_ref = shift;
        reverse B<${ $name }>;
    }

=end programlisting

If you forget to dereference a scalar reference and try to print it, you will
see something like C<SCALAR(0x93339e8)> instead of the value.  The hexadecimal
vale in the parentheses represents the memory address of the scalar (but don't
expect to do anything useful with that; references are not like pointers--you
cannot perform math operations on them).

=head4 Array References

X<array references>
X<references; arrays>

You can also create references to arrays, or I<array references>.  This is
useful for several reasons:

=over 4

=item * To pass and return arrays from subroutines without flattening

=item * To use multi-dimensional data structures

=item * To avoid unnecessary copying of arrays

=item * To use anonymous data structures

=back

X<array references; creating>

Those may all seem esoteric, but they're each valuable in different situations.
To take a reference to a declared array, use the reference operator:

=begin programlisting

    my @cards     = qw( K Q J 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 A );
    my $cards_ref = \@cards;

=end programlisting

Now C<$cards_ref> contains a reference to the array.  Any modifications made
through C<$cards_ref> will modify C<@cards> as well.

X<array references; dereferencing>

You may access the entire array as a whole with the C<@> sigil, whether to
flatten the array into a list or count the number of elements it contains:

=begin programlisting

    my $card_count = B<@$cards_ref>;
    my @card_copy  = B<@$cards_ref>;

=end programlisting

X<references; dereferencing arrow>
X<< -> >>
X<< operators; -> >>
X<operators; dereferencing arrow>

You may also access individual elements by using the dereferencing arrow:

=begin programlisting

    my $first_card = B<< $cards_ref->[0]  >>;
    my $last_card  = B<< $cards_ref->[-1] >>;

=end programlisting

The arrow is necessary to distinguish between a scalar named C<$cards_ref> and
an array named C<@cards_ref> from which you wish to access a single element.

You can also access an array slice, but for that you must use the curly-brace
dereferencing syntax:

=begin programlisting

    my @high_cards = B<@{ $cards_ref }>[0 .. 2, -1];

=end programlisting

Strictly speaking, the curly braces are unnecessary in this case, but their
presence along with the whitespace makes the expression easier to read.

X<references; anonymous arrays>
X<anonymous arrays>
X<arrays; anonymous>

You may also create anonymous arrays without taking a reference to a named
array first.  Surround a list of values or expressions with square brackets:

=begin programlisting

    my $suits_ref = [qw( Monkeys Robots Dinosaurs Cheese )];

=end programlisting

All of the other array reference syntax and operations work the same.

=for author

array references
    - uses

hash references
    - creating
        - from a named hash
        - anonymous hash
    - accessing scalar values
    - accessing the entire hash
    - hash slices

subroutine references
    - creating
        - from a named subroutine
        - from an anonymous subroutine
    - invoking
        - directly
        - with arguments
        - as methods

filehandle references
    - creating
    - using
    - caveats
        - IO::Handle

Lifecycle; reference count.

=end for
